Thank you.
Good morning.
It is lovely to see you all this morning, to see so many new faces as well, actually, it is wonderful, so welcome.
I was saying to David earlier on that I had a 24-hour shift yesterday, which I got home at seven this morning, and I incidentally am preaching about wisdom, but made a massive, massive ever-in-judgment in not trying to swap out of that shift.
Because I thought, oh, I'll be fine.
I'll get home at nine o'clock in the evening and I'll sleep.
Yeah, that did not happen.
But here we are.
So I've given my sister permission to come and throw water over me if I start to drift off.
But I'm sure we will be fine.
So yes, so today we're going to be speaking about wisdom.
And as you know, if you've been in church over the last couple of weeks, you know that we have been going through a series called Unshakable.
And this is the fourth talk in that series.
And when I was preparing for today, I was thinking about the series that we're doing and why.
Because there has to be a reason why we pick these topics.
They're not arbitrary.
They're not just for the sake of it.
And we have had some pretty amazing series over the last couple of years if you've been in church.
And I think this one in particular, we have to accept the fact that life isn't easy sometimes.
And we all from time to time go through situations, challenges in life that
try to shake us.
That's just the reality of life.
I don't think that there's anybody in this church today that hasn't been through something at some point.
There may be many of us who are in this room now who are currently navigating something that's a bit difficult.
And so that's the reality of living in a fallen world.
You know, the Christian walk is not a casual stroll through the Metro.
It's difficult at times.
But it's not all bad news.
It's some very, very good news.
And that is that we are not left to do this walk alone.
We have the word of God.
We have the Father.
And there is so much
gold in the Word of God.
It provides us with every single thing that we need to be able to navigate through life.
Second Timothy 3, 16 says that all scripture is inspired by God and is useful and it's all useful and I think we can sometimes have a tendency to focus on the areas of the Bible that are a bit more familiar and a bit easier to navigate but actually the entirety of scripture is useful for our lives and what I enjoy about series like this is that it gives us the opportunity to go into parts of the Bible that we maybe don't actually spend that much time in because they're a bit strange and they're a bit complicated and
It's hard to say the names of the people, but actually all scripture is inspired by God and all scripture is useful.
And so it's like a safe, it's a safe and accessible way to be able to tap into what's in those parts of the Word of God.
And so this particular series that we're in unshakeable is centered around the Book of Daniel.
And we're looking at the the lives of
Daniel and three of his friends who were called Hananiah, Michelle and Azariah, who we would probably know more familiarly as Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego.
And the various challenges and situations that they go through and how God is with them.
And it almost reads like this adventure novel where the protagonists just get going from like danger to danger.
But it's just amazing to see what God does in their lives.
And although it was back then, it's still so, so relevant for our lives today.
So, yeah, we've had three talks so far and if you haven't been in church or you've missed any of those series, then I would just encourage you to go onto YouTube or onto the church website and just have a little listen to the talks that we've had so far because they have been great.
So, as I said today, we are going to be taking the fourth topic in the series and that is on wisdom.
And hopefully what we'll do is look at some examples from the Book of Daniel of what we can learn about
what godly wisdom is and how we can apply that to our lives.
So the first question is what is wisdom?
And I spent a long time looking for definitions of wisdom.
So you'll forgive me because the best definition I could find was from Wikipedia.
So Wikipedia defines wisdom as the ability to apply knowledge, experience and good judgment to navigate life's complexities.
So essentially it's
knowing things, having lived things, experiencing things and then taking all of that and applying it to the situations that we face.
And that's very different to knowledge.
Knowledge is factual, it's information.
Whereas wisdom is about the application of that because it's possible to have a lot of knowledge, it's possible to know a lot of things without actually being wise.
It's
possible to acquire vast amounts of information without knowing how to actually apply it, how to actually make it useful for our lives.
And there's like a funny quote which you've probably seen before, which says that knowledge is known that a tomato is a fruit, but wisdom is known not to put it in a fruit salad.
So knowledge and wisdom, very different things.
But then I found what I think is a better definition of wisdom.
And this was from the NIBBiable.com.
And it said that wisdom is a capacity of mind that allows us to understand life from God's perspective.
And I think it's such a good definition because where we see the Wikipedia definition of a wisdom as being about our knowledge and our experiences and how we apply them to life, or even the knowledge and experiences of our fellow man, even the collective knowledge and wisdom of all of mankind.
And that is
That's helpful, that's useful, but ultimately it's still limited and ultimately it's still flawed.
Where is
Godly wisdom stems from God.
It stems from the infinite knowledge and infinite wisdom of the person who made the heavens and the earth.
And all of that is accessible to us.
He knows all things because he made all things.
He knows what is right and what is wrong because he defined what is right and what is wrong.
And the fact that we have access to his mind, the fact that we have access to all of the wisdom that he supplies is not something that we should underestimate.
And it's all there for us.
there for us in the Word of God, we just have to access it.
We should never underestimate how precious and how valuable that is.
What can we learn about godly wisdom from the Book of Daniel?
Well, we're gonna be focusing on Daniel chapter two.
And if I just set the scene and put it into context, we know that the Book of Daniel is set in a time when the Israelite people had been taken into captivity by the kingdom of Babylon.
And Daniel alongside a number of the young men had been selected to be in service to the king who at what time was Nebuchadnezzar.
And in Daniel chapter two, which tells us that one night, King Nebuchadnezzar had a dream that was very confusing and very troubling.
And when he walked, he wanted to understand what the dream meant.
And so he called for various people in his kingdom, the wise people in his kingdom.
So the magicians, the astrologers, the sorcerers, the mathematicians, basically anyone in the kingdom who might have the ability to be able to interpret his dream for him.
Now, you might recall that there's a similar event that was recorded in Scripture and that was with Pharaoh in the time of Joseph when he also had a dream.
And he called his wise men to interpret it for him.
But Nebuchadnezzar did something slightly different, which I think is hilariously unreasonable, which is that he refused to even say what his dream was.
He said, I need you to tell me what my dream is and then interpret it for me.
So, so the wise men obviously said to him, like, this is, this is not possible.
It's, it isn't possible to do what you're asking.
There isn't a man in this kingdom who can tell you what your dream is.
Just tell us the dream and then we will attempt to interpret it.
But King Nebuchadnezzar said, no, I've made my decision.
You need to.
you need to tell me what my dream is.
And because they couldn't do this, and in his fury, he set out a decree that all the wise men in the entire kingdom were gonna be destroyed.
And he sent his guards out to find and kill them all, which was pretty extreme.
But sadly, that included Daniel and his companions because they were amongst the learned and wise in the kingdom.
So that's the context.
So I'm gonna read a couple of verses from Daniel chapter two, and it's verses 14 to 20, and then verse 23.
So it says, when Ariok, the commander of the king's guard, had gone out to put to death the wise men of Babylon, Daniel spoke to him with wisdom and tact.
He asked the king's officer, why did the king issues such a harsh decree?
Ariok then explained the matter to Daniel.
At this, Daniel went into the king and asked for time so that he might interpret the dream for him.
Then Daniel returned to his house and explained the matter to his friends, Hananiah, Michelle, and Azariah.
He urged them to plead for mercy from the God of Heaven concerning this mystery so that he and his friends might not be executed with the rest of the wise men of Babylon.
During the night, the mystery was revealed to Daniel in a vision.
Then Daniel praised the God of Heaven and said, praise be to the name of God forever and ever, wisdom and power are his.
I thank and praise you, God of my ancestors, you have given me wisdom and power.
You have made known to me what we asked of you, and you have made known to us the dream of the king.
And then if you
continue to read on to the rest of the chapter, then you'll see that Daniel was granted an ordinance with the king, he glorified God, and then he was not only able to recount the king's dream as requested, but he also gave him the interpretation and in soldiering he and his friends found favor with the king and their lives were preserved.
So that's the context.
So what can we take from this account and what can we learn about Godly wisdom?
Well, there's lots of things, but there was four things in particular that I wanted to highlight.
So the first thing is that Godly wisdom is proactive without being reactive.
So Daniel calmly sought out information to better understand his situation.
So if we read verses 14 and 15 again, it says that Daniel spoke to him with wisdom intact.
He asked the king's officer, why did the king issue such a harsh decree?
So we can probably agree that Daniel's situation was was pretty.
was pretty desperate.
This decree had gone out that the wise men in the land were going to be killed.
And Daniel was unlikely to have been the first person to have been approached.
He may well have already heard of people that he knew, people that he had been educated with having already been killed.
And it would be understandable for him to be a bit alarmed and to panic and to be really quite worried about his own situation.
But what Daniel didn't do was wail and lament and say, woe is me and how could God bring me into captivity and preserve my life only to have me killed.
What he did do was take a moment to understand his situation.
He calmly and proactively gathered the information that he needed to be able to plan his next steps.
He simply asked a question of the king's officer.
Why did the king issue this decree?
And the officer answered him.
But why is that important?
Well, two things.
Firstly, acting without reacting demonstrates our faith in both the goodness and the power of God.
It says that, yes, my situation is difficult.
That's not denying that I'm in a bind.
This is difficult.
But I know that God loves me.
I know that he's on my side and I know that he has the power to intervene.
When we act without reacting, it's evidence that we actually trust God above all else.
And secondly, where panic can cloud our minds and prevent us from seeing the way forward, acting without reacting, it quiets our spirit and it leaves us open to actually receive instruction and practical guidance from God.
Now, when you look through scripture, there are lots of examples of when God's people have found themselves in quite alarming situations.
And unfortunately, you haven't always necessarily demonstrated that godly wisdom, despite having ample evidence of God's love for them and evidence of his power that's been demonstrated to them personally in the past.
And a couple of examples of that, or one example is of the Israelites when they had just been released from captivity in Egypt.
They had been rescued and they were on their way to the lands that God had promised them.
they reached the edge of the Red Sea with apparently no way forward.
And then to make it worse, Pharaoh had changed his mind and he was giving chase and they were trapped in the middle.
Now, we have to remember that the people had just witnessed and experienced a miraculous rescue from Egypt.
They had just witnessed the 10 plagues where God's power and authority had been clearly demonstrated and
they had been saved and they had been promised that they were going to see the promised land.
So when they encountered this setback, they knew what God had already done and they knew what God had promised to do, but they panicked and they reacted.
And if you read Exodus 14, verse 11 to 12, they cried out to Moses and they said, why did you bring us out here in the wilderness to die?
Weren't there enough graves for us in Egypt?
Didn't we tell you that this was going to happen?
It would have been better for us to serve the Egyptians than to die in the wilderness.
So they definitely didn't approach things with a cool head.
And another example of this is Jesus-owned disciples.
One situation that they encountered was when they were in the boat with Jesus at night and Jesus was sleeping and then they encountered a raging storm.
Again, the disciples, they had seen Jesus turn water into wine and they had seen him heal sick and give sight to the blind and all manner of other miracles.
They knew and believed that he was the son of God and they knew what he could do.
But when they were in that situation, they panicked.
They woke Jesus up and they cried, don't you even care if we all die?
And I think, you know, we
We can relate to that.
We can look at that and think, oh, these are the lights, these disciples.
But the reality is that we all do that.
We find ourselves in difficult situations and we think what is going on.
And we worry and we panic and we stress.
But the reality is that setbacks are a part of life.
they're gonna happen.
They aren't pleasant and they do try to shake us, but the evidence of godly wisdom is not the absence of setbacks.
It's not making all the right decisions so that we never find ourselves in a difficult situation because that just isn't in our power.
The evidence of godly wisdom is how we respond when they inevitably occur.
Do we panic and complain or do we use that setback as an opportunity to demonstrate how much we trust God and allow him to actually show up on our behalf
Because if we look at those two examples, you know, the Israelites that are set back on the edge of the Red Sea, that paved the way for one of the most amazing miracles that's recorded in scripture, the potting of the Red Sea.
And for the disciples in the boat, they got to see Jesus demonstrate his authority even over the natural world.
You know, it paved the way for God to show his power in amazing ways that just needed to trust God.
So godly wisdom is in acting without reacting.
The second thing that I wanted to mention is that godly wisdom doesn't try to go it alone.
So Daniel sought out support from godly companions.
So in verse 17, it tells us that Daniel, then Daniel returned to his house and explained the matter to his friends, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah.
We all need godly companions to do life with.
We need them.
No man is an island.
None of us were intended to walk through life alone.
And there are times that even with all the knowledge and all the understanding and all the faith and all the evidence of what God has done, sometimes we just need a support and the Council of
of others, friends.
There were times when it's just not wise to go through things alone.
And we see from scripture right from the creation of man that God, you know, man was never meant to be alone.
God designed man and said, this is perfect.
This is good.
But aloneness was considered to be bad.
If you look at the account in Genesis, the only thing that God described as not good was man being alone.
And
It's really important for us to strike the balance because what we don't want to do is be in a situation where we are utterly dependent on others to lift us up.
You know, we need to have a personal relationship with God.
We need to have a personal conviction of who God is to us and an understanding of what he can do and be confident in that ourselves.
our faith is deeply personal and nobody can cultivate that relationship with God for us.
But that doesn't change the fact that sometimes we need other people because there are times when the burdens are too heavy for us to bear alone.
But what is it that stops us from doing that?
Well, sometimes we may have been hurt or let down by people in the past and we know that those wounds can be difficult to heal.
Sometimes it's our own personal pride.
That stops us from sharing our problems because we are afraid to appear weak.
We are afraid to appear as if we don't have it all together.
But seeking the support of others is not a sign of weakness.
It's a demonstration of godly wisdom.
Ecclesiastes 4 and verses 9 to 10 says, two are better than one.
because they have a good return for their labour.
If either of them falls down, one can help the other up, but pity anyone who falls and has no one to help them up.
So the reality is that no matter how strong our faith, sometimes we will fall down.
We will face trials and challenges that are too much for us to bear alone.
And as we select the start, that's just simply the reality of life.
There is a danger in isolating ourselves.
We can find ourselves lulled into a false sense of security, thinking that we're better off or that we don't need others.
And that might be the case for a while.
We might be fine for a time.
And if we're in a season where we're costing, where actually things are OK and nothing is particularly difficult, then we can deceive ourselves into thinking that actually I'm actually fine on my own.
The reality is that when danger strikes, isolation makes us vulnerable.
Now, a couple of months ago, Pulumi gave an example from scripture, which
I think I've successfully managed to mention in every single time I've been up on here since then.
And I'm going to mention it again and I make no apologies because it's really, really good.
But it's in the big of judges and it talks about a time called a town, sorry called Fleish, and that was targeted to partake over by the Israelites.
And if we look at the account in Judges chapter 18 and verse 78, what it says about this town, it says,
So the five men left and came to Laish where they saw that the people were living in safety, like the Sidonians, at peace and secure.
And since their land lacked nothing, they were prosperous.
So this town of Laish was doing really well.
It had everything it needed.
It was prospering.
They were costing.
They didn't need anything from anyone.
But they had no idea that they were being watched.
They had no idea that they were a target.
And while they
appeared to be doing well and going about their daily lives.
They actually had no idea how vulnerable they really were.
And when you continue on in that chapter, Judges 18 and into verses 27 and 28, it tells us what happened to this town.
It says, they attacked them with the sword and burned down their city.
And there was no one to rescue them because they lived a long way from Sidon and had no relationship with anyone else.
We need to let that be a warning to us that we can be doing okay.
We can be costing.
We can be prospering on the surface of it.
But when we're alone, when we're isolated, we are vulnerable because when those attacks come, we've got no one to rescue us.
First Peter five and verse eight warns us, be alert of sober mind.
Your enemy, the devil prowls around like a roaring lion looking for someone to devour.
And I was thinking about, you know, my kids and I, we watched probably a lot of people do watch the David Attenborough documentary, Our Planet, which you talk about the natural world.
And time and time again, you see the lions or the cheaters or the jaguars when they are on the hunt.
They don't attack the animal that's in the middle of the herd because the herd is impenetrable.
even with their speed and their strength and their teeth, they cannot overcome the collective strength of the herd.
And so what do they do?
They target the loner, they target the animal that wasn't quite paying attention and has wandered off alone.
The isolation of those animals makes them vulnerable and it's no different for us.
We need to be wise.
We can't make ourselves easy targets.
But as well as avoiding isolation, the choice of companionship is also really important.
And godly wisdom dictates that we should find godly allies to do life with, because ungodly ones can send us in a direction that we don't want to go in.
And scripture gives us lots of verses that talk about the benefits and the dangers of the type of companionship that we hold.
I've put a couple of verses up there.
Proverbs 27 verse 17 tells us that iron sharpens iron.
So in other words, godly relationships, they make both parties sharper, stronger, wiser.
Proverbs 13 verse 20 says, whoever walks with the wise becomes wise, but the companion of fools will suffer harm.
Proverbs 18, 24, one who has unreliable friends soon comes to ruin, but there is a friend who sticks closer than a brother.
And first Corinthians 1533, did not be misled.
Bad company corrupts a good character.
The only thing that is worse than isolation is bad companionship.
In a time of trouble and danger, Daniel sought out not just any friends, but true godly companions.
And so like Daniel, we need to do the same.
We need to cultivate strong godly relationships.
And these relationships, they take time and effort to cultivate.
sometimes think it's so much easier for children to just make friends that thrown into a situation like like kids or school where they're automatically surrounded by people who are of the same age as them and have similar interests and it's so much harder as an adult and I think it just gets more and more complicated as life goes on.
I was thinking about myself and you know I miss my maternity leave days where I could just ring up a friend and say let's go for a coffee and we just
we just thought, it just happened whereas now I'm penciling people into the third.
Wednesday of September and, you know, subject to availability.
And the reality is it's just, it's hard.
It's difficult to make time, but it's worth it.
It's worth the effort.
And I see myself, I go through seasons where I'm just so busy.
I'm just so busy.
I don't see anybody.
I see people at work and I see people in church, but I don't see anybody.
And then I go through other times when I think, no, I'm going to be really intentional.
I'm going to make time for people.
And the difference is obvious.
we need to cultivate those friendships.
And so I would just encourage anybody who is feeling like they want to cultivate those godly friendships, but don't know where to start.
Don't try and do that alone.
Ask for help.
Ask David, ask Nicola, ask any of the leaders in the church.
If you're thinking about joining a life group and you don't know where to start, ask for help in choosing one that would work for you.
Don't be afraid or too shy to help but to ask for help because godly wisdom is in seeking support from godly companions.
It's so important.
The third thing is that godly wisdom seeks counsel from god and we can see that Daniel prayed.
Verse 18 tells us that he urged them to plead for mercy from the God of heaven concerning this mystery.
So in a time of danger, Daniel sought God in prayer.
And we'll notice that prayer wasn't the last resort.
It wasn't, I'm going to make this plan and we're going to try this and we're going to do this.
And if all else feels, well, at least we can still pray.
When Daniel sought out his companions, the first thing that they did was seek the face of God.
The first thing that they did was to pray.
And it's so important that we put things in their proper place because we can sometimes try to be completely self-sufficient and just be problem solvers.
And there's nothing wrong with thinking about things.
There's nothing wrong with being, we've talked about being proactive.
But what we don't want to do is
We don't want to make our plans and then present them to God for verification and approval.
We also don't want him to be the last resort.
God wants us to seek him first.
He wants to be first.
Proverbs three verses five to six says, trust in the Lord with all your heart and do not depend on your own understanding.
Seekers will in all you do and he will show you which path to take.
He is going to set us in the right direction because there are a multitude of ways to solve a problem.
But when we seek the face of God first, he sets us on the right path so that we don't waste time going down the wrong one.
When we come to God first, we open ourselves to receiving his wisdom and his guidance.
And as we said before, it quiets our spirit.
It blocks out the anxious thoughts and the plans that arise from our own limited understanding and opens us up to receiving what God wants to direct us in.
Philippians chapter four verse six says, don't be anxious about anything, but in every situation by prayer and petition with thanksgiving, present your requests to God.
And the consequence of doing that, it says, is that the peace of God which transcends all understanding will guard your hearts and your minds in Christ Jesus.
When we act without praying, we often make unwise decisions out of fear and limited understanding, but when we prioritize prayer, it paves the way for peace, for clarity, and just good decision making.
So Godly wisdom seeks God's counsel.
And then the fourth is that Godly wisdom demonstrates gratitude.
Daniel gave thanks.
So verses 19 and 23, it says, and Daniel prays the God of heaven.
It says, I thank and I praise you, God of my ancestors.
You have given me wisdom and power.
You have made known to me what we asked of you.
You have made known to us the dream of the king.
There is godly wisdom in thanking God.
And thankfulness is an active process.
There's a pastor in Christian author called Tim Keller, and he said, it's one thing to be grateful, and it's another thing to give thanks.
Gratitude is what you feel, but thanksgiving is what you do.
And there are a number of Bible verses that talk about us being instructed to give thanks.
And again, I've put a few examples up there.
1 Thessalonians 5 verses 16 to 18, it says, the choice always, pray continually, give thanks in all circumstances, for this is God's will for you in Christ Jesus.
Psalm 107 verse one, give thanks to the Lord, for he is good, his love and joyous forever.
Psalm 100 verse four, enter his gates with thanksgiving in his courts with praise.
Give thanks to him and praise his name.
In Ephesians 5, 20,
always giving thanks to God the Father for everything in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.
And these are just a few examples.
The scripture is full of examples of instructions and also examples of people actively giving thanks and praising God.
So thankfulness is an active process.
It's more than just a feeling like love.
It requires demonstration.
The account above doesn't say that Daniel was grateful.
It says that he gave thanks
Now it's obviously it's important that we feel gratitude in our hearts toward God.
But then when we make a deliberate, active, outward expression of that gratitude, it has a multitude of benefits.
So a couple of those things.
Firstly, thankfulness, it glorifies God.
That outward expression of our gratitude is an active worship to God.
It's a demonstration that we
ascribe all praise and all honor to him, the God most high.
And we recognize him as the source of our blessings, of our peace, of our wisdom.
The second is that it brings us closer to God when we're thankful.
Psalm 22 verse three says that God inhabits the praises of his people.
So when we actively praise and thank God it draws us closer to him and it builds our own personal relationship with him.
And then the third is that when we're
When we give thanks to God, it serves as a testimony to others.
We're not keeping it to ourselves.
Psalm 9 verse 1 says, I will give thanks to you, Lord, with all my heart.
I will tell of all your wonderful deeds.
So when we publicly thank God and, you know,
openly give thanks to him for the things that he is doing and who he is to us.
Then it serves as a testament to others.
It allows them to celebrate with us and to rejoice with us over what God has done.
But it also serves as an anchor for their own faith.
Because we've said, there are things that we're all believing God for.
There are things that we're all going through.
And when we hear others giving thanks for what God has done in their lives, it boosts our own faith.
And it reminds us that, yes, God is there.
God can do it.
God does do it.
He loves us.
And so we should never be shy to give thanks to God.
There is wisdom in openly and actively giving thanks.
So in summary, what we've said is that we can see from the Daniel chapter two and we can
We can take from that that there is godly wisdom and acting without reacting, seeking support from godly companions, prioritising prayer and giving thanks to God.
And we know that setbacks and challenges are inevitably going to occur in big and small ways as we go through life.
But like Daniel, they don't have to shake us.
They don't have to derail us.
When we apply Godly wisdom to life setbacks, they provide opportunities for us to demonstrate our faith in God.
And in his power and his love for us, it tells us that we know that God loves us.
And they draw us closer to him and also serves as an encouragement to others.
And we haven't been able to even scratch the surface of what scripture tells us about Godly wisdom.
There's so much.
It's if you just search the word wisdom, there's just a wealth in the scriptures about that.
And it's something that we really need to invest time in studying for ourselves.
But the last thing that I wanted to say as I invite Adam off, as we were going to a time of ministry is the fact that, you know, in Daniel's day, there were people that were considered to be the wise.
There were those that were considered to be the learned and the educated and the keepers of wisdom.
Wisdom isn't for a select view, it's for all of us.
We all have access to the wisdom that God supplies.
James 1 verse 5 says that if anyone lacks wisdom, anyone, you should ask God who gives generously to all without finding fault and it will be given to you.
And I think, and I just want to emphasize without finding fault because, you know, it takes humility to go to God and to ask for wisdom to say, I don't have the answers.
I don't have it figured out.
I need help.
I need you to set me on the right path.
But when we do that, God doesn't refortress.
He doesn't, you know, he doesn't belittle us.
He doesn't say, why don't you already know this?
How long have you been walking with me?
How long have you had faith in me and you still need to ask?
He doesn't do that.
He invites us to come to him.
He invites us to come freely to the throne of grace.
He says, I have the wisdom.
It's available to you.
You just need to ask.
And so I would encourage all of us that if we lack wisdom, if there's something that we need wisdom for, we should come to God freely and ask because He gives it to us freely.